This video is brought to you by brilliant, to find out more about brilliant,
get a brilliant.org/biographics more about brilliance in a bit.
Louis pastor was the chemist has gone down in history as one of the fathers of
microbiology. He is famous for several accomplishments that changed science.
As we know it,
including the pasteurization process of killing bacteria from liquids and paving
the way for immunology by creating lifesaving vaccines, these accomplishments,
they're just the tip of the iceberg because without pastor's revolutionary germ
theory, modern medicine would not be anything like it is today.
On this episode of biographics,
we are talking out the life and work of Louis pastor and why he was one
of history's greatest minds.
Louis pastor was born in France on December the 27th, 1822.
He was raised in a town called AOI by his parents, JF pastor,
et his father served as a Sergeant during the Napoleonic war and received the
Legion of honor. After the war genre,
Joseph worked as a fulltime leather Tanner like generations of pasta men before
him, even though this was the family business,
Jean Joseph did not want to force his son to carry on the tanning trade and was
open to allowing him to find his zone passion.
Usually when we hear stories of accomplished academic minds like Louis pastor,
we imagine that they must have been geniuses their whole life. In reality,
young Louis was a very average student in school as a young man.
He was actually far more interested in sketching,
works of art than reading his textbooks.
He spent a lot of time drawing and painting using the J amount in his
inspiration.
Louis pastor's father encouraged him to follow his passion for art and consider
the endeavor to be just as valuable as academic goals. George,
there always encouraged Louis to read as many books as possible so that he
remained curious about the world around him. As a veteran,
he also instilled a sense of national pride to Louis and a duty to the people
of France since he spent most of his young life daydreaming and sketching li
actually felt so far behind academically that he had to receive a lot of
tutoring help at college AOI,
which is where he went to secondary school before attending university at Thema
superior in Paris. This is where he began taking classes in science.
Chemistry became his new passion and he had the goal of earning his PhD in 1847.
He received his doctorate degree and this set the course for the rest of his
life
While he was earning his PhD.
Louis pastor taught chemistry at secondary school called DeShaw LII before
becoming a research chemist at the university of STRs Borg,
when he was just 25 years old,
he'd already made discoveries that became vital in developing vaccines in the
future microscopes that existed for hundreds of years before Louis pastor was
born.
But new improvements on the machine helped scientists to discover the existence
of microorganisms.
Louis pester was far from the only scientist to be studying microorganisms at
the time, but he was one of the very first,
he is widely considered to be one of the fathers of the field that would later
come to be called microbiology in 1849.
Louis pester was attempting to solve issues that winemakers were having while
fermenting grapes.
Some batches of wine would go sour very quickly while a others would not even
when the ingredients and process were exactly the same.
Every time winemakers could not figure out why this was happening.
Pasture was able to gather tartaric acid,
which is one of the chemicals presence in the sediments of the wine.
During the fermentation process,
after dissolving the tartaric acid pasture was able to pass polarized light
through the sample. In order to of it,
he discovered that there was a nearly identical compound known as para tartaric
acid in the wine sediments.
Every other scientist who had observed the same samples assumed that the
chemical was the same because it has the same composition as tartaric acid.
However, while these molecules seem identical at first,
they are actually mirror images of one another.
You can think of it as either being left to our right-handed versions of the
same chemical with one of them causing the grapes to go sour today.
This process,
the pastor discovered of finding the mirror version of a chemical compound is
known as molecular Chi reality.
And it is actually extremely important in pharmaceutical chemistry because a
left or right-handed version may react completely differently.
Once it is metabolized in the human body,
even though it has the exact same chemical composition, his discovery,
and the variations between the structure and shape of a molecule also led to the
field of stereochemistry with just this one discovery Louis pastor was able to
fix a problem and also pave the way for future scientists in several fields of
chemistry. This alone,
would've been a huge accomplishment that would've put his name down in his
history, but well, he was far from finished with his life's work.
Leo met his future wife, Maria Lauren,
when he was working at the university of STRs bog Murray was the daughter of the
school's rec. So she spent most of her life in an academic environment.
She worked in the school's law Bo and was assigned as Louis pastor's lab
assistant in am.
This is someone who writes down the scientific information and assists in making
sketches of his discoveries.
Marie was a well-educated woman and she would've had a lot of scientific
background knowledge in order for her to understand and record the information.
If she was born in a different time,
there is no doubt that she would've been a full-fledged chemist as well.
French is so art at the time they founded inappropriate for women to become
scientists, but Marie and Louis, they respected one another.
And the two of them were truly devoted to this work.
It only makes sense that they were perfect to one another,
both inside and outside the laboratory.
Louis pasture was 25 years old when he made the discoveries in wine sediments.
And the two of them were able to share the victory of a job well done. The,
this would only be the beginning of their teamwork.
The two were married on may the 29th, 1849.
Louis pastor was 26 and Marie was 23. As the years, went on,
Marie continued to assist Louis in his experiments without her knowledge and
professionalism. By his side,
he may not have been able to accomplish as much as he did in his career.
They went on to have five children together,
but tragically only two would survive childhood as parents.
He lost three children.
They knew the pain that all parents feel when their children die from a disease
that could have been prevented.
If only there had been a vaccine that existed to help them.
The two of them became determined to devote their careers,
to saving the lives of other children.
And they were eventually able to accomplish just that. Now,
just before we get into the thing that pastor is most famous for now is a
perfect time for me to tell you about today's sponsored brilliance,
these longer videos that really made possible because of sponsors like
brilliant. So I'd love it. If you had a moment just to check them out,
when you're done watching this video, you're doing that.
It really does allow us to keep doing what we do here at biographics.
And you know, you are watching a 20 minute video on YouTube without a scientist.
So educational content like brilliance is probably something you're gonna be
into brilliance are a science and learning platform that allow you to learn
through active learning,
which summed up is basically the opposite of reading a really complex paragraph
about some principle, and then having no idea what an earth it's about,
even though you've it through like 17 times, yes. Still don't get it.
It's not just me. Now, if you regularly tune in for these biographics videos,
then you know that brilliant are often a sponsor,
but they've recently added something new to their app.
All of their courses can now be accessed offline.
So you don't have to worry about having a solid internet connection or using up
your data to go through their courses. Now, maybe that be,
you can spend your commute learning something new,
or indeed you can just be guaranteed to be able to learn something wherever you
are brilliant. It makes even complex concepts easy. As you understand,
they give you something super short to read and then you immediately apply it to
a problem.
And basically you just rinse and repeat that there's loads of these ones that
you go through, all kind of progressing along until you mastered a subject.
All the courses are totally interactive.
So you can learn probability by playing a game of blackjack or learn the physics
of motion using interactive models of pendulum clocks.
So if you want to support biographics and get unlimited access to all of
brilliance in depth, maths and science courses, head on over to brilliant.org,
four slash biographic, and going through that link, not only sports this show,
but you'll get 20% off their annual premium subscription.
And let's get back to pastor
Before he could begin studying diseases.
Louis pastor still needed to do the scientific research that was paying the
bills. In 1854, pastor became a chemistry professor at the university of Lil.
He was paid to continue researching issues in alcohol manufacturing.
He became the Dean of the science department as well and helped to mentor the
rest of the faculty in 1861, pastor discovered ABI,
which is crucial in understanding how yeast and sugar formed alcohol during the
fermentation process,
even though fermentation had going on for thousands of years of human history,
no one else had been able to explain the how and why of the chemical process.
So today, yes, everyone running some hipster,
micro brewery has Louis pastor to thank for their careers, making craft beer.
Once he fully understood the fermentation process.
Pasta had a theory that these invisible organisms called germs and bacteria were
responsible for causing wine, beer and milk to go sour.
He proved that by boiling these liquids,
he could kill the bacteria and then cool it to make it drinkable. Again.
The first successful test was completed on April the 20th, 1862,
that process of eating and cooling it was named after him.
So it was known as pasteurization.
And it is a process that is still used today.
Louis pastor was able to move on from the food industry and begin studying
disease, which had been his goal in 1865.
He was able to prove that microbes were causing a disease that destroyed
silkworm eggs. His wife,
Maria assisted him in growing the silkworms and keeping them alive.
During the course of the experiment,
he was able to develop a prevention for contamination and saved the silk making
industry around the world. So aside from our clean wine and beer,
we also need to thank him for our fancy silk robes and pajamas.
Once he was beginning to understand how bacteria caused illness,
he was beginning to come up with his germ theory for the majority of human
history. People did not know about the existence of germs and they did not fully
understand the immune system. The widely held belief was the, my theory,
which was that diseases caused by a poisonous vapor in the air that only came
out at night. <laugh> yes,
it does sound a bit ridiculous in retrospect, but people had absolutely no,
I idea how or why human beings contracted illnesses in hospitals,
doctors and nurses never even bothered to wash their hands because they truly
did not understand the spread of human disease, human waste.
It would sometimes make its way into the water system,
which would trigger huge outbreaks of infectious disease.
All because people did not understand that germs existed.
Other scientists had proposed to germ theory long before Louis pastor,
but it was often dismissed.
People had believed in my asthma theory for so long that it had just become the
truth in England, a scientist named Dr. John Snow,
not to be confused with the character from game of Thrones,
there was able to save London from the collar outbreak by convincing the town to
shut down a water pump that had been infected by human waste there,
pastor would've probably read about snow's breakthrough and bacterial research,
and it would inspire him to push gem theory as well. Soon enough,
pastor and the other fathers of microbiology were able to prove that the,
my asthma theory was nothing but a fantasy and the acknowledgement that germs
existed, it would change the medical industry. As we know it
In 1868,
Louis pastor was just 46 years old when he suffered a severe stroke and he
became partially paralyzed. Instead of going to a hospital,
Pastora was treated in his home.
16 leaches were placed behind his ears to clear the bloods that had pulled
around his cerebral hemorrhage. After the doctor left with leaches,
Louis pastor was left with his wife, Marie.
He was very lucky that she had such an extensive science backgrounds because she
helped to rehabilitate him. And he overcame as paralysis.
This story is usually glossed over in many of the history books.
We tend to glorify the major accomplishments of successful people and ignore the
struggles Louis pastor.
He was still a human and recovering from a stroke is never an easy task.
Back in the 18 hundreds,
a stroke would likely mean death or permanent paralysis for the rest of his
life.
Maureen nursed him back to health and encouraged him to heal so that they could
both returns look laboratory and continue their life's work of curing diseases.
Even though it's health recovered,
it would be years before Louis pastor was able to make another major scientific
discovery. It was eight years later.
The pastor made his first major breakthrough since having a stroke at the time.
Scientists believed in the idea of spontaneous generation.
This is the notion that living creatures could spontaneously generate from
inanimate substances. People believe that living creatures were born.
Asexually like mice forming in rotting, food and frogs emerging from the mut.
This belief was so common that there were even some scientific papers claiming
to come up with a recipe for growing your own mice pastor publicly denounced the
age old belief of spontaneous generation,
but there were still plenty of people who had their doubts in the past.
Other scientists like Francisco ready,
had attempted to prove that spontaneous generation was not real.
He sealed a piece of meat and a jar with a lid,
proving that as long as flies did not land on the food lava did not appear.
However,
people did not believe this because they thought oxygen maybe necessary for the
so-called recipe.
The only way pastor was able to convince the public that animals are not born
outta food,
was to design custom Swan neck bottles that curved in such a way that allowed
oxygen to get through, but it would be impossible for flies to crawl inside.
He boiled a beef broth and left it inside the Swan neck bottle. Finally,
with that, the idea of spontaneous generation was debunked.
Two years later in 1878, Pastora was studying diseases.
When he accidentally exposed chickens to an attenuated culture of chicken
cholera, however, the chickens did not die from the disease. In fact,
it had the exact opposite effect when they were later exposed to the full
fledged chicken chole of virus, they had become immune.
This was Louis pastor's very first vaccine at the time,
the idea that he could replicate these results in human beings was still years
away from actually happening.
But he theorized that if he could replicate that same process,
he may be able to create vaccines for some of the deadliest diseases of the time
like anthrax, tuberculosis, and small parks. A year later in 1881,
Lou pastor developed a vaccine for anx good several sheep in his laboratory from
the disease, even after conducting the same experiment, hundreds of times,
the scientific community still did not believe in Louie pastor's results.
Even when everyone marked and ridiculed him,
he did not back down because he knew that he was right for years.
People refused to believe him until to the town of per LA four,
which had a farm filled with sheep that had been infected with anthrax.
Pastor injected his vaccine to all of the six sheep in front of a large crowd of
people. Sure enough,
all of the sheep recovered and the newspapers finally declared that he truly had
invented the cure.
He once wrote this advice to future generations on how to deal with haters,
do not let yourself be tainted with a Barron skepticism.
After Louis pastor's jam theory was published in academic papers.
There was a significant amount of proof that his animal vaccines were working
educated.
People with open minds understood the concept of bacteria and they make efforts
to improve public health and safety in France.
Following Louis pasture's discovery about germs,
a politician named UEN puel began enforcing the first garbage cans in Paris in
1884.
At first citizens were outraged that they could no longer just throw their trash
wherever they wanted,
despite dealing with all of the skepticism and push back from the public.
Puel continued to mandate that garbage cans were necessary in every home today.
We take garbage cans for granted,
but this was a huge step in disease prevention. Over the next few years,
the spread of disease began to fall dramatically in France and other countries
around the world began to copy the idea. However,
just like every other scientific discovery and human history,
there were still people who refused to in the germ theory,
despite all of the proof that was out there.
Pastor had plenty of critics who still trying to claim that he was incorrect.
Louis pastor had a bitter rivalry with another scientist named Anto Biamp who
completely dismissed his germ theory instead of believing in the existence of
germs, Biamp published his own theory of Cleo morphism,
but of course the truth always has a way of coming out.
And pastor continued to be the one who came out on top.
Louis Aster continued to prove to the world that his germ theory was correct.
And that infections were the cause of disease at the time.
Rabies and anthrax were both very serious problems in animals.
If a dog was infected and bit someone,
it was guaranteed that they would die an excruciatingly painful death after
years of overcoming so much doubt in the scientific community.
Louis pastor was now well regarded for his achievements in science and medicine
in 1873,
the academy to medicine elected to bring him on as an associate member of the
society. Then in 1882, it was into the academy for say,
while he was doing research there,
he decided to devote his research to curing rabies. In 1883,
pastor was creating the rabies vaccine by acquiring rabbits that had been
infected by the virus and attempting to inject that vaccine into doc,
after trial and error,
he was able to cure dogs who had been infected and bring them back to health.
But using the vaccine,
human being had not been done until 1885 on July the sixth,
the nine year old boy named Joseph Meister was brought to Louis pastor in Paris.
His parents had traveled for two days from AAS after he was bitten by a rabbit
dog at first Pastora hesitated because he had only ever experimented with the
vaccine on docs, but the boy was going to die anyway. So fester agreed to try.
He gonna mul from the spinal cord of a rabbit who had rabies and formed a
vaccine. The process did not happen overnight. Over the next 10 days,
Joseph was given 13 more injections of the vaccine and he was hospitalized for
three months after the boy made a full recovery.
Louis pastor became famous around the world for finding the cure on the 20th of
October,
that same year an adult male who had been infected with rabies six days earlier,
was brought to Louis pastor. He repeated the same vaccination process as before,
and the man made a full recovery. Now,
there was no doubt that the vaccine truly worked in 1886.
Louis pastor began to treat over 350 patients who had been infected with Rab in
Europe and the United States, Louis pastor's wife,
Marie traveled the world with him and nursed the sick children with rabies for a
few months at a time while her husband was preparing the vaccines and giving the
injections. Of course today,
this same vaccine is what helps keep our dogs in counts, safe from rabies,
no matter where he went, whether he could speak the language or not.
The story was all always the same.
He was very proud that he was able to accomplish this on behalf of France.
He said, science knows no country because knowledge belongs to humanity.
And is the torch, which illuminates the world.
Science is the highest personification of the nation because that nation will
remain the first, which carries the furthest, that works of thought.
And in intelligence during this process of meeting healing over 350 people,
pastor got to know many of his patients,
many of them were young children who were Biten while playing with their dogs.
He said, when I approached a child,
he inspires in the two sentiments tenderness for what he is and
respect for what he may become.
Lou pastor wanted to save the lives of these sick children so that they could
have a chance to grow up.
And he wanted his vaccines to do the same for future generations all over the
world. Finally,
he was recognized as a scientist worthy of his own research facility and a
fundraising campaign began to create the pastor Institute in Paris.
This was finally an on November, the 14th, 1888. When he turned 70,
he was given a spectacular birthday by party at the university of Paris.
And some of the most prestigious doctors and scientists that were in the world
came to celebrate his life. And his works,
Lou pastor died in 1895 at the age of 73.
His body is now an crypt at the pastor Institute, but his work,
it has lived on far after his passing today.
We still use pasteurization in the food history and his breakthroughs in
medicine. They were just the beginning.
Other scientists began to use the same methods to create vaccines for diseases
that had once killed thousands of people. There is no telling,
just too many millions of people would've died without the work that he was able
to accomplish. So I really hope you found that video interesting and inspiring.
I certainly did self, if you liked it, please do give us a thumbs up below.
Don't forget to subscribe, hit that bell button.
So you find out when we do put out new videos,
please do also check our brilliance, brilliant.org/buying graphics.
It helps support this channel, which is fantastic.
So please go check that out and as always, thank you for watching.